Add Moonwall (#315)
polkadot-developers/polkadot-docs: develop/toolkit/parachains/e2e-testing/moonwall.md

---

> title: Moonwall

Reviewer: More context please

> title: Moonwall

Reviewer: ```suggestion
title: E2E Testing with Moonwall
```

=== "npm"

    ```bash
    npm install -g @moonwall/cli@{{ dependencies.moonwall.version }}
    ```

=== "pnpm"

    ```bash
    pnpm -g install @moonwall/cli@{{ dependencies.moonwall.version }}
    ```

=== "yarn"

    ```bash
    yarn global add @moonwall/cli@{{ dependencies.moonwall.version }}
    ```

Now, you should be able to run the `moonwall` command from your terminal.

### Local Installation

For better dependency management and version control within a specific project, local installation is recommended. First, initialize your project:

```bash
mkdir my-moonwall-project
cd my-moonwall-project
npm init -y
```

Then, install it as a local dependency:

=== "npm"

    ```bash
    npm install @moonwall/cli@{{ dependencies.moonwall.version }}
    ```

=== "pnpm"

    ```bash
    pnpm install @moonwall/cli@{{ dependencies.moonwall.version }}
    ```

=== "yarn"

    ```bash
    yarn add @moonwall/cli@{{ dependencies.moonwall.version }}
    ```

## Initialize Moonwall

The `moonwall init` command launches an interactive wizard to create your configuration file:

```bash
moonwall init
```

During setup, you'll be prompted for the following parameters:

> - `label` - identifies your test configuration
> - `global timeout` - maximum time (ms) for test execution
> - `environment name` - name for your testing environment
> - `network foundation` - type of blockchain environment to use
> - `tests directory` - location of your test files

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **`label`** - identifies your test configuration
- **`global timeout`** - maximum time (ms) for test execution
- **`environment name`** - name for your testing environment
- **`network foundation`** - type of blockchain environment to use
- **`tests directory`** - location of your test files
```

Simply press `Enter` to accept defaults, or input custom values. You should see something like this:

--8<-- 'code/develop/toolkit/parachains/e2e-testing/moonwall/init.html'

The wizard generates a `moonwall.config` file:

```json
--8<-- 'code/develop/toolkit/parachains/e2e-testing/moonwall/init-moonwall.config.json'
```

> The default configuration needs to be enhanced with specific details about your blockchain node and test requirements:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The default configuration requires specific details about your blockchain node and test requirements:
```

> - The `foundation` object defines how your test blockchain node will be launched and managed. For local development, the `dev` foundation is used which runs a local node binary

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- The `foundation` object defines how your test blockchain node will be launched and managed. The dev foundation, which runs a local node binary, is used for local development
```

>     !!!note

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

>         For more information about available options, check the [Foundations](https://moonsong-labs.github.io/moonwall/guide/intro/foundations.html){target=\_blank} section.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
For more information about available options, check the [Foundations](https://moonsong-labs.github.io/moonwall/guide/intro/foundations.html){target=\_blank} section.
```
This will be part of the new style guide updates, just fixing here so I don't have to update it later

> - The `connections` array specifies how your tests will interact with the blockchain node. This typically includes provider configuration and endpoint details.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- The `connections` array specifies how your tests will interact with the blockchain node. This typically includes provider configuration and endpoint details
```

>     !!!note

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

>         A provider is a tool that allows you or your application to connect to a blockchain network and simplifies the low-level details of the process. A provider handles submitting transactions, reading state, and more. For more information on available providers check the [Providers supported](https://moonsong-labs.github.io/moonwall/guide/intro/providers.html#providers-supported){target=\_blank} page.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
A provider is a tool that allows you or your application to connect to a blockchain network and simplifies the low-level details of the process. A provider handles submitting transactions, reading state, and more. For more information on available providers, check the [Providers supported](https://moonsong-labs.github.io/moonwall/guide/intro/providers.html#providers-supported){target=\_blank} page in the Moonwall documentation.
```

Here's a complete configuration example for testing a local node using Polkadot.js as a provider:

```json
--8<-- 'code/develop/toolkit/parachains/e2e-testing/moonwall/moonwall.config.json'
```

## Writing Tests

> Moonwall uses the [`describeSuite`](https://github.com/Moonsong-Labs/moonwall/blob/7568048c52e9f7844f38fb4796ae9e1b9205fdaa/packages/cli/src/lib/runnerContext.ts#L65){target=\_blank} function to define test suites, like using [Mocha](https://mochajs.org/){target=\_blank}. Each test suite requires:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Moonwall uses the [`describeSuite`](https://github.com/Moonsong-Labs/moonwall/blob/7568048c52e9f7844f38fb4796ae9e1b9205fdaa/packages/cli/src/lib/runnerContext.ts#L65){target=\_blank} function to define test suites, like using [Mocha](https://mochajs.org/){target=\_blank}. Each test suite requires the following:
```

> - `id` - unique identifier for the suite
> - `title` - descriptive name for the suite
> - `foundationMethods` - specifies the testing environment (e.g., `dev` for local node testing)
> - `testCases` - a callback function that houses the individual test cases of this suite

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **`id`** - unique identifier for the suite
- **`title`** - descriptive name for the suite
- **`foundationMethods`** - specifies the testing environment (e.g., `dev` for local node testing)
- **`testCases`** - a callback function that houses the individual test cases of this suite
```

---
title: Moonwall
description: Enhance blockchain end-to-end testing with Moonwall's standardized environment setup, comprehensive configuration management, and simple network interactions.
---

# E2E Testing with Moonwall

## Introduction

> Moonwall is a end-to-end testing framework specifically designed for Polkadot SDK-based blockchain networks. It addresses one of the most significant challenges in blockchain development: managing complex test environments and network configurations.

Reviewer 3: Unsure if "network configurations" would be 100% accurate here. Does moonwall allow us to test p2p settings and that kind of things?

Reviewer 3: oh, maybe you meant something related to the `moonwall.config.json` file, but I think the purpose of that file is to define the settings of the test suite

Author: When it says network configuration, it means that you can configure the parameters you use to run your blockchain network, like using a local node, a chopsticks fork, zombienet, etc. Do you think it is confusing?

Here's a complete configuration example for testing a local node using polkadot.js as a provider:

```json
--8<-- 'code/develop/toolkit/parachains/e2e-testing/moonwall/moonwall.config.json'
```

## Writing Tests

Moonwall uses the `describeSuite` function to define test suites, like using [Mocha](https://mochajs.org/){target=\_blank}. Each test suite requires:

- `id` - unique identifier for the suite
- `title` - descriptive name for the suite
- `foundationMethods` - specifies the testing environment (e.g., `dev` for local node testing)

The following example shows how to test a balance transfer between two accounts:

```ts
--8<-- 'code/develop/toolkit/parachains/e2e-testing/moonwall/test1.ts'
```

This test demonstrates several key concepts:

- Initializing the Polkadot.js API through Moonwall's context and setting up test accounts
- Querying on-chain state
- Executing transactions
- Waiting for block inclusion
- Verifying results using assertions

## Running the Tests

Execute your tests using the Moonwall CLI command:

```bash

> moonwall test INSERT_ENVIRONMENT_NAME_HERE

Reviewer 3: Please add a note below explaining this placeholder
